.Dd $Mdocdate: December 29 2019 $
.Dt PRINTF 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm printf
.Nd write formatted output
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar format
.Op Ar argument ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility formats and writes its arguments, under control of the
.Ar format ,
to the standard output. The
.Ar format
is a string composed of plain characters, character escape sequences, and
conversion specifiers.
.Ss Character escape sequences
The following character escape sequences, which are in backslash notation,
are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Cm \ea
A
.Aq bell
character.
.It Cm \eb
A
.Aq backspace
character.
.It Cm \ef
A
.Aq form-feed
character.
.It Cm \en
A
.Aq new-line
character.
.It Cm \er
A
.Aq carriage return
character.
.It Cm \et
A
.Aq tabulation
character.
.It Cm \ev
A
.Aq vertical tabulation
character.
.It Cm \e\e
A backslash character.
.It Cm \e Ns Ar num
A 8-bit character represented by a octal number.
.El
.Ss Conversion Specifiers
The following conversion specifiers are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Cm \&%di
Signed decimal.
.It Cm \&%c
Single character.
.It Cm \&%o
Unsigned octal.
.It Cm \&%s
Nil-terminated string.
.It Cm \&%u
Unsigned decimal.
.It Cm \&%Xx
Unsigned hexadecimal.
.It Cm \&%\&%
The percent
.Pq Sq \&%
character.
.El
.Pp
Along with the following flags:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Cm #
The argument is converted to an alternative form.
.It Cm -
The argument is left-justified within the field.
.It Cm +
The argument is preceded by a sign.
.It Sq \&\ \&
The argument, when it is a positive number, is preceded by a blank character.
.It Cm \&0
The argument will be zero-padded instead of blank-padded.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr echo 1
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Nm
utility is compliant with the
.St -p1003.1-2017
specification except from the
.Dq Cm \&%b
conversion specifier.
